docs/guides/cli.md, before:

# Succinctly CLI Tool

Command-line utility for working with succinct data structures.

## Installation

Build the CLI tool with the `cli` feature:

```bash
cargo build --release --features cli
```

The binary will be located at `target/release/succinctly`.

## Commands

### JSON Generation

Generate synthetic JSON files for benchmarking and testing.

```bash
succinctly json generate <SIZE> [OPTIONS]
```

#### Size Format

Supports case-insensitive size units:
- **Plain numbers**: `1024` (bytes)
- **Bytes**: `100b` or `100B`
- **Kilobytes**: `1kb`, `512KB`, `1Kb`
- **Megabytes**: `1mb`, `10MB`, `100Mb`
- **Gigabytes**: `1gb`, `2GB`, `5Gb`

#### Options

- `-o, --output <FILE>`: Write to file (default: stdout)
- `-p, --pattern <PATTERN>`: JSON pattern to generate (default: `comprehensive`)
- `-s, --seed <SEED>`: Random seed for reproducible generation
- `--pretty`: Pretty print JSON
- `--verify`: Validate generated JSON
- `--depth <N>`: Nesting depth for nested structures (default: 5)
- `--escape-density <F>`: Escape sequence density 0.0-1.0 (default: 0.1)

#### Patterns

**comprehensive** (default)
- Best for benchmarking
- Tests all JSON parsing features:
  - Simple values (booleans, nulls, numbers)
  - String variations with escapes
  - Number formats (integers, decimals, scientific notation)
  - Nested arrays and objects
  - Unicode strings (emoji, multiple scripts)
  - Edge cases (empty structures, long strings, etc.)
- Distributed across 10 feature categories
- Optimized for SIMD, state machine, and BP operation testing

**users**
- Array of user objects
- Realistic structure with IDs, names, emails, ages, scores
- Good for testing realistic workloads

**nested**
- Deeply nested objects
- Tests nesting depth and balanced parentheses operations
- Configurable depth with `--depth`

**arrays**
- Arrays of arrays
- Tests array handling and nesting

**mixed**
- Balanced mix of all JSON types
- Random distribution of strings, numbers, bools, nulls, arrays, objects

**strings**
- String-heavy documents
- Tests string parsing performance
- Long Lorem Ipsum strings

**numbers**
- Number-heavy documents
- Various number formats (integers, decimals, scientific notation)

**literals**
- Boolean and null heavy
- Tests literal parsing (true, false, null)

**unicode**
- Unicode-heavy strings
- Multiple scripts: Chinese, Russian, Arabic, Japanese, Korean, Greek, Hebrew, Hindi
- Emoji and special symbols

**pathological**
- Worst-case for parsing
- Maximum structural character density
- Deeply nested with many structural tokens

## Examples

### Basic Generation

```bash
# Generate 1MB to stdout
succinctly json generate 1mb

# Generate 10MB to file
succinctly json generate 10mb -o benchmark.json

# Generate with verification
succinctly json generate 100kb --verify -o test.json
```

### Pattern Selection

```bash
# Comprehensive benchmarking pattern
succinctly json generate 10mb --pattern comprehensive -o bench.json

# Pathological worst-case
succinctly json generate 1mb --pattern pathological -o worst-case.json

# Unicode testing
succinctly json generate 1mb --pattern unicode -o unicode-test.json

# Realistic user data
succinctly json generate 5mb --pattern users -o users.json
```

### Reproducible Generation

```bash
# Generate with seed for reproducibility
succinctly json generate 100mb --seed 42 -o reproducible.json

# Same seed produces identical output
succinctly json generate 100mb --seed 42 -o reproducible2.json
diff reproducible.json reproducible2.json  # No differences
```

### Configuration

```bash
# Control nesting depth
succinctly json generate 10mb --depth 10 -o deep.json

# Control escape sequence density (30% of strings have escapes)
succinctly json generate 10mb --escape-density 0.3 -o escaped.json

# Pretty printed JSON
succinctly json generate 10kb --pretty -o pretty.json
```

### Piping and Benchmarking

```bash
# Generate and pipe to parser
succinctly json generate 10mb | your-json-parser

# Generate and immediately benchmark
succinctly json generate 100mb -o benchmark.json --verify
time cat benchmark.json | your-parser
```

## Benchmarking Recommendations

For comprehensive JSON parser benchmarking:

1. **Use the comprehensive pattern** (default):
   ```bash
   succinctly json generate 100mb -o benchmark.json
   ```

2. **Test multiple sizes**:
   ```bash
   for size in 1kb 16kb 128kb 1mb 16mb 128mb; do
       succinctly json generate $size -o bench-$size.json
   done
   ```

3. **Test different patterns**:
   ```bash
   for pattern in comprehensive users nested pathological unicode; do
       succinctly json generate 10mb --pattern $pattern -o bench-$pattern.json
   done
   ```

4. **Use reproducible seeds** for consistent benchmarks:
   ```bash
   succinctly json generate 100mb --seed 42 -o benchmark.json
   ```

## Output Format

The comprehensive pattern generates JSON with the following structure:

```json
{
  "metadata": {...},
  "simple_values": {...},      // 10% - bools, nulls, simple numbers
  "strings": [...],            // 15% - various string patterns
  "numbers": [...],            // 10% - number format variations
  "arrays": {...},             // 15% - nested and flat arrays
  "nested": {...},             // 15% - deep object nesting
  "data": [...],               // 20% - realistic records
  "unicode": [...],            // 10% - unicode strings
  "edge_cases": {...}          // 5%  - parser edge cases
}
```

Each section tests specific parsing features:
- **State transitions**: InJson ↔ InString ↔ InEscape ↔ InValue
- **Structural characters**: `{}[],:` (BP open/close operations)
- **Escape sequences**: `\"`, `\\`, `\n`, `\t`, `\r`, `\b`, `\f`
- **Number parsing**: integers, decimals, scientific notation
- **Unicode**: UTF-8 multibyte sequences
- **Nesting depth**: Balanced parentheses find_close operations

## yq Command

Query YAML files using a yq-compatible interface (mikefarah/yq). Implements YAML 1.2 Core Schema - see [YAML 1.2 Compliance](../compliance/yaml/1.2.md) for details on type handling.

```bash
succinctly yq [OPTIONS] <FILTER> [FILES...]
```

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Identity filter (pretty-print YAML)
succinctly yq . input.yaml

# Field access
succinctly yq '.name' input.yaml

# Array indexing
succinctly yq '.[0]' input.yaml
succinctly yq '.users[0].name' input.yaml

# Iterate all elements
succinctly yq '.[]' input.yaml
succinctly yq '.users[]' input.yaml
```

### Output Options

- `-o, --output-format <FORMAT>`: Output format: `yaml` (default), `json`, `auto`
- `-I, --indent <N>`: Indent level (0 for compact output, default: 2)
- `-r, --unwrapScalar`: Output raw strings without quotes (default for YAML)
- `-j, --join-output`: Like -r but no newline after each output
- `-0, --nul-output`: Use NUL char to separate values instead of newline
- `-S, --sort-keys`: Sort keys of each object on output
- `-C, --colors`: Force colorized output
- `-M, --no-colors`: Disable colorized output
- `-N, --no-doc`: Don't print document separators (`---`)
- `-P, --prettyPrint`: Pretty print, expand flow styles to block style
- `--tab`: Use tabs for indentation
- `-a, --ascii-output`: Output ASCII only, escaping non-ASCII as `\uXXXX`

### Input Options

- `-n, --null-input`: Don't read any input; use null as the single input value
- `-R, --raw-input`: Read each line as a string instead of parsing as YAML/JSON
- `-s, --slurp`: Read all inputs into an array and use it as the single input value
- `-p, --input-format <FORMAT>`: Input format: `auto` (default), `yaml`, `json`
- `-i, --inplace`: Update the file in place
- `--doc <N>`: Select specific document by 0-based index from multi-document stream

### Variables

- `--arg NAME VALUE`: Set $NAME to the string VALUE
- `--argjson NAME VALUE`: Set $NAME to the JSON VALUE

### Exit Status

- `-e, --exit-status`: Set exit status based on output (0 if last output != false/null)

### Examples

```bash
# YAML to JSON conversion
succinctly yq -o json . config.yaml

# Compact JSON output (use -I 0)
succinctly yq -o json -I 0 . config.yaml

# Raw string output
succinctly yq -r '.name' user.yaml

# JSON input with YAML output
succinctly yq -p json . input.json

# Update file in place
succinctly yq -i '.version = "2.0"' config.yaml

# NUL-separated output (for xargs -0)
succinctly yq -0 '.items[]' list.yaml | xargs -0 process

# Multiple files
succinctly yq '.version' config1.yaml config2.yaml

# Pipe from stdin
cat data.yaml | succinctly yq '.items[]'

# Multi-document YAML
succinctly yq '.' multi-doc.yaml
```

### Differences from jq

The `yq` subcommand uses yq-compatible flags (mikefarah/yq v4):

| Feature | jq | yq (succinctly yq) |
|---------|----|--------------------|
| Compact output | `-c` | `-I 0` |
| Raw output | `-r` | `-r` (--unwrapScalar) |
| Default output | JSON | YAML |
| Input format | JSON only | Auto-detect (YAML/JSON) |
| Inplace edit | N/A | `-i` |
| NUL separator | N/A | `-0` |

---

## jq Command

Query JSON files using a jq-compatible interface.

```bash
succinctly jq [OPTIONS] <FILTER> [FILES...]
```

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Identity filter (pretty-print)
succinctly jq . input.json

# Field access
succinctly jq '.name' input.json

# Array indexing
succinctly jq '.[0]' input.json
succinctly jq '.users[0].name' input.json

# Iterate all elements
succinctly jq '.[]' input.json
succinctly jq '.users[]' input.json
```

### Output Options

- `-c, --compact-output`: Compact output (no pretty printing)
- `-r, --raw-output`: Output raw strings without quotes
- `-j, --join-output`: Like -r but no newline after each output
- `-S, --sort-keys`: Sort keys of each object on output
- `-C, --color-output`: Colorize output
- `-M, --monochrome-output`: Disable colorized output
- `--tab`: Use tabs for indentation
- `--indent <N>`: Use N spaces for indentation (max 7)

### Output Formatting

By default, succinctly formats output exactly like jq does:
- **Scientific notation**: `4e4` → `4E+4`, `12e2` → `1.2E+3`, `1e-3` → `0.001`
- **Trailing zeros**: preserved (`0.10` → `0.10`)
- **Escape sequences**: `\b` and `\f` output as escape sequences (not `\u0008`)

To preserve the original formatting from the input (e.g., keep `4e4` as `4e4`):

```bash
# Using flag
succinctly jq --preserve-input . input.json

# Using environment variable
SUCCINCTLY_PRESERVE_INPUT=1 succinctly jq . input.json
```

### Input Options

- `-n, --null-input`: Don't read any input; use null as the single input value
- `-R, --raw-input`: Read each line as a string instead of JSON
- `-s, --slurp`: Read all inputs into an array
- `--input-dsv <DELIMITER>`: Read input as DSV (delimiter-separated values); each row becomes a JSON array of strings

### Variables

- `--arg NAME VALUE`: Set $NAME to the string VALUE
- `--argjson NAME VALUE`: Set $NAME to the JSON VALUE
- `--slurpfile NAME FILE`: Set $NAME to an array of JSON values from FILE
- `--rawfile NAME FILE`: Set $NAME to the string contents of FILE

### Examples

```bash
# Compact output
succinctly jq -c '.users[]' data.json

# Raw string output
succinctly jq -r '.name' user.json

# Sort keys for diff-friendly output
succinctly jq -S . config.json

# Multiple files
succinctly jq '.version' package1.json package2.json

# Pipe from stdin
cat data.json | succinctly jq '.items[]'

# Output matches jq by default
succinctly jq . input.json | diff - <(jq . input.json)
```

### Assignment Operators

The jq command supports assignment operators for modifying JSON in-place:

```bash
# Simple assignment
echo '{"a": 1}' | succinctly jq '.a = 42'
# Output: {"a": 42}

# Update assignment (applies filter to current value)
echo '{"x": 5}' | succinctly jq '.x |= . * 2'
# Output: {"x": 10}

# Compound assignment (+=, -=, *=, /=, %=)
echo '{"count": 10}' | succinctly jq '.count += 5'
# Output: {"count": 15}

echo '{"value": 100}' | succinctly jq '.value -= 25'
# Output: {"value": 75}

# Alternative assignment (sets only if null/false)
echo '{"a": null}' | succinctly jq '.a //= "default"'
# Output: {"a": "default"}

echo '{"a": "existing"}' | succinctly jq '.a //= "default"'
# Output: {"a": "existing"}  (unchanged)

# Delete field or array element
echo '{"a": 1, "b": 2}' | succinctly jq 'del(.a)'
# Output: {"b": 2}

echo '[1, 2, 3]' | succinctly jq 'del(.[1])'
# Output: [1, 3]

# Update all array elements
echo '[1, 2, 3]' | succinctly jq '.[] |= . * 2'
# Output: [2, 4, 6]

# Chained assignments
echo '{"x": 0, "y": 0}' | succinctly jq '.x = 10 | .y = 20'
# Output: {"x": 10, "y": 20}

# Nested assignment
echo '{"user": {"name": "Alice", "age": 30}}' | succinctly jq '.user.age += 1'
# Output: {"user": {"name": "Alice", "age": 31}}
```

| Operator | Syntax             | Description                                         |
|----------|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| `=`      | `.path = value`    | Simple assignment                                   |
| `\|=`    | `.path \|= filter` | Update assignment (apply filter to current value)   |
| `+=`     | `.path += value`   | Add to current value                                |
| `-=`     | `.path -= value`   | Subtract from current value                         |
| `*=`     | `.path *= value`   | Multiply current value                              |
| `/=`     | `.path /= value`   | Divide current value                                |
| `%=`     | `.path %= value`   | Modulo of current value                             |
| `//=`    | `.path //= value`  | Set only if current value is null or false          |
| `del()`  | `del(.path)`       | Delete field or array element                       |

## jq-locate Command

Find the jq expression for a position in a JSON file. Useful for editor integration and debugging.

```bash
succinctly jq-locate <FILE> [OPTIONS]
```

### Options

- `--offset <OFFSET>`: Byte offset in file (0-indexed)
- `--line <LINE>`: Line number (1-indexed)
- `--column <COLUMN>`: Column number (1-indexed, byte offset within line)
- `--format <FORMAT>`: Output format: `expression` (default) or `json`

### Examples

```bash
# Find expression by byte offset
succinctly jq-locate input.json --offset 42
# Output: .users[0].name

# Find expression by line/column
succinctly jq-locate input.json --line 5 --column 10
# Output: .config.version

# Detailed JSON output
succinctly jq-locate input.json --offset 42 --format json
# Output: {"expression":".users[0].name","type":"string","start":38,"end":52}
```

---

## yq-locate Command

Find the yq expression for a position in a YAML file. Useful for editor integration and debugging.

```bash
succinctly yq-locate <FILE> [OPTIONS]
```

### Options

- `--offset <OFFSET>`: Byte offset in file (0-indexed)
- `--line <LINE>`: Line number (1-indexed)
- `--column <COLUMN>`: Column number (1-indexed, byte offset within line)
- `--format <FORMAT>`: Output format: `expression` (default) or `json`

### Examples

```bash
# Find expression by byte offset
succinctly yq-locate config.yaml --offset 42
# Output: .users[0].name

# Find expression by line/column
succinctly yq-locate config.yaml --line 5 --column 10
# Output: .spec.containers[0]

# Detailed JSON output
succinctly yq-locate config.yaml --offset 42 --format json
# Output: {"expression":".users[0].name","type":"string","start":38,"end":52}
```

---

## Development

Run tests for the CLI:

```bash
cargo test --features cli --bin succinctly
```

Build in debug mode:

```bash
cargo build --features cli
./target/debug/succinctly json generate 1kb
```

Commit message:

feat(cli): implement multi-call binary support with comprehensive alias system
Adds multi-call binary functionality allowing the succinctly binary to be
invoked through short symlink aliases like sjq, syq, sjq-locate, and
syq-locate. This significantly improves user experience by providing
familiar, short commands similar to jq/yq while maintaining full
backward compatibility.

Core implementation changes:
- Add try_multicall() function to detect argv[0] and dispatch to appropriate subcommands
- Implement InstallAliases command to create managed symlinks
- Support both short aliases (sjq/syq) and compatibility aliases (jq/yq)
- Add comprehensive alias management with conflict detection and cleanup

Documentation updates across all user-facing files:
- Update README.md with alias-first examples and usage patterns
- Enhance CLAUDE.md with multi-call architecture explanation
- Revise installation guide to include alias setup as recommended step
- Update quickstart with alias-based command examples
- Expand CLI guide with alias installation and usage details

Testing infrastructure:
- Add golden test for install-aliases help output
- Update main help snapshot to include new command
- Ensure all alias functionality is properly tested

This change transforms the CLI from a verbose multi-subcommand tool into
a user-friendly suite of focused utilities while preserving the full
feature set for advanced users and scripts.

docs/guides/cli.md, after:

# Succinctly CLI Tool

Command-line utility for working with succinct data structures.

## Installation

Build the CLI tool with the `cli` feature:

```bash
cargo build --release --features cli
```

The binary will be located at `target/release/succinctly`.

### Short Aliases

Install short alias symlinks for interactive use:

```bash
succinctly install-aliases              # creates symlinks next to the binary
succinctly install-aliases --dir ~/bin  # or specify a directory on your PATH
```

This creates `sjq`, `syq`, `sjq-locate`, and `syq-locate` symlinks. With aliases installed, you can use `sjq` instead of `succinctly jq`:

```bash
sjq '.users[].name' input.json        # instead of: succinctly jq '.users[].name' input.json
syq '.spec.containers[]' k8s.yaml     # instead of: succinctly yq '.spec.containers[]' k8s.yaml
```

The binary also recognizes `jq` and `yq` as alias names if you create those symlinks manually, but `install-aliases` does not create them to avoid shadowing system tools.

## Commands

### JSON Generation

Generate synthetic JSON files for benchmarking and testing.

```bash
succinctly json generate <SIZE> [OPTIONS]
```

#### Size Format

Supports case-insensitive size units:
- **Plain numbers**: `1024` (bytes)
- **Bytes**: `100b` or `100B`
- **Kilobytes**: `1kb`, `512KB`, `1Kb`
- **Megabytes**: `1mb`, `10MB`, `100Mb`
- **Gigabytes**: `1gb`, `2GB`, `5Gb`

#### Options

- `-o, --output <FILE>`: Write to file (default: stdout)
- `-p, --pattern <PATTERN>`: JSON pattern to generate (default: `comprehensive`)
- `-s, --seed <SEED>`: Random seed for reproducible generation
- `--pretty`: Pretty print JSON
- `--verify`: Validate generated JSON
- `--depth <N>`: Nesting depth for nested structures (default: 5)
- `--escape-density <F>`: Escape sequence density 0.0-1.0 (default: 0.1)

#### Patterns

**comprehensive** (default)
- Best for benchmarking
- Tests all JSON parsing features:
  - Simple values (booleans, nulls, numbers)
  - String variations with escapes
  - Number formats (integers, decimals, scientific notation)
  - Nested arrays and objects
  - Unicode strings (emoji, multiple scripts)
  - Edge cases (empty structures, long strings, etc.)
- Distributed across 10 feature categories
- Optimized for SIMD, state machine, and BP operation testing

**users**
- Array of user objects
- Realistic structure with IDs, names, emails, ages, scores
- Good for testing realistic workloads

**nested**
- Deeply nested objects
- Tests nesting depth and balanced parentheses operations
- Configurable depth with `--depth`

**arrays**
- Arrays of arrays
- Tests array handling and nesting

**mixed**
- Balanced mix of all JSON types
- Random distribution of strings, numbers, bools, nulls, arrays, objects

**strings**
- String-heavy documents
- Tests string parsing performance
- Long Lorem Ipsum strings

**numbers**
- Number-heavy documents
- Various number formats (integers, decimals, scientific notation)

**literals**
- Boolean and null heavy
- Tests literal parsing (true, false, null)

**unicode**
- Unicode-heavy strings
- Multiple scripts: Chinese, Russian, Arabic, Japanese, Korean, Greek, Hebrew, Hindi
- Emoji and special symbols

**pathological**
- Worst-case for parsing
- Maximum structural character density
- Deeply nested with many structural tokens

## Examples

### Basic Generation

```bash
# Generate 1MB to stdout
succinctly json generate 1mb

# Generate 10MB to file
succinctly json generate 10mb -o benchmark.json

# Generate with verification
succinctly json generate 100kb --verify -o test.json
```

### Pattern Selection

```bash
# Comprehensive benchmarking pattern
succinctly json generate 10mb --pattern comprehensive -o bench.json

# Pathological worst-case
succinctly json generate 1mb --pattern pathological -o worst-case.json

# Unicode testing
succinctly json generate 1mb --pattern unicode -o unicode-test.json

# Realistic user data
succinctly json generate 5mb --pattern users -o users.json
```

### Reproducible Generation

```bash
# Generate with seed for reproducibility
succinctly json generate 100mb --seed 42 -o reproducible.json

# Same seed produces identical output
succinctly json generate 100mb --seed 42 -o reproducible2.json
diff reproducible.json reproducible2.json  # No differences
```

### Configuration

```bash
# Control nesting depth
succinctly json generate 10mb --depth 10 -o deep.json

# Control escape sequence density (30% of strings have escapes)
succinctly json generate 10mb --escape-density 0.3 -o escaped.json

# Pretty printed JSON
succinctly json generate 10kb --pretty -o pretty.json
```

### Piping and Benchmarking

```bash
# Generate and pipe to parser
succinctly json generate 10mb | your-json-parser

# Generate and immediately benchmark
succinctly json generate 100mb -o benchmark.json --verify
time cat benchmark.json | your-parser
```

## Benchmarking Recommendations

For comprehensive JSON parser benchmarking:

1. **Use the comprehensive pattern** (default):
   ```bash
   succinctly json generate 100mb -o benchmark.json
   ```

2. **Test multiple sizes**:
   ```bash
   for size in 1kb 16kb 128kb 1mb 16mb 128mb; do
       succinctly json generate $size -o bench-$size.json
   done
   ```

3. **Test different patterns**:
   ```bash
   for pattern in comprehensive users nested pathological unicode; do
       succinctly json generate 10mb --pattern $pattern -o bench-$pattern.json
   done
   ```

4. **Use reproducible seeds** for consistent benchmarks:
   ```bash
   succinctly json generate 100mb --seed 42 -o benchmark.json
   ```

## Output Format

The comprehensive pattern generates JSON with the following structure:

```json
{
  "metadata": {...},
  "simple_values": {...},      // 10% - bools, nulls, simple numbers
  "strings": [...],            // 15% - various string patterns
  "numbers": [...],            // 10% - number format variations
  "arrays": {...},             // 15% - nested and flat arrays
  "nested": {...},             // 15% - deep object nesting
  "data": [...],               // 20% - realistic records
  "unicode": [...],            // 10% - unicode strings
  "edge_cases": {...}          // 5%  - parser edge cases
}
```

Each section tests specific parsing features:
- **State transitions**: InJson ↔ InString ↔ InEscape ↔ InValue
- **Structural characters**: `{}[],:` (BP open/close operations)
- **Escape sequences**: `\"`, `\\`, `\n`, `\t`, `\r`, `\b`, `\f`
- **Number parsing**: integers, decimals, scientific notation
- **Unicode**: UTF-8 multibyte sequences
- **Nesting depth**: Balanced parentheses find_close operations

## yq Command

Query YAML files using a yq-compatible interface (mikefarah/yq). Implements YAML 1.2 Core Schema - see [YAML 1.2 Compliance](../compliance/yaml/1.2.md) for details on type handling.

```bash
succinctly yq [OPTIONS] <FILTER> [FILES...]
```

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Identity filter (pretty-print YAML)
succinctly yq . input.yaml

# Field access
succinctly yq '.name' input.yaml

# Array indexing
succinctly yq '.[0]' input.yaml
succinctly yq '.users[0].name' input.yaml

# Iterate all elements
succinctly yq '.[]' input.yaml
succinctly yq '.users[]' input.yaml
```

### Output Options

- `-o, --output-format <FORMAT>`: Output format: `yaml` (default), `json`, `auto`
- `-I, --indent <N>`: Indent level (0 for compact output, default: 2)
- `-r, --unwrapScalar`: Output raw strings without quotes (default for YAML)
- `-j, --join-output`: Like -r but no newline after each output
- `-0, --nul-output`: Use NUL char to separate values instead of newline
- `-S, --sort-keys`: Sort keys of each object on output
- `-C, --colors`: Force colorized output
- `-M, --no-colors`: Disable colorized output
- `-N, --no-doc`: Don't print document separators (`---`)
- `-P, --prettyPrint`: Pretty print, expand flow styles to block style
- `--tab`: Use tabs for indentation
- `-a, --ascii-output`: Output ASCII only, escaping non-ASCII as `\uXXXX`

### Input Options

- `-n, --null-input`: Don't read any input; use null as the single input value
- `-R, --raw-input`: Read each line as a string instead of parsing as YAML/JSON
- `-s, --slurp`: Read all inputs into an array and use it as the single input value
- `-p, --input-format <FORMAT>`: Input format: `auto` (default), `yaml`, `json`
- `-i, --inplace`: Update the file in place
- `--doc <N>`: Select specific document by 0-based index from multi-document stream

### Variables

- `--arg NAME VALUE`: Set $NAME to the string VALUE
- `--argjson NAME VALUE`: Set $NAME to the JSON VALUE

### Exit Status

- `-e, --exit-status`: Set exit status based on output (0 if last output != false/null)

### Examples

```bash
# YAML to JSON conversion
succinctly yq -o json . config.yaml

# Compact JSON output (use -I 0)
succinctly yq -o json -I 0 . config.yaml

# Raw string output
succinctly yq -r '.name' user.yaml

# JSON input with YAML output
succinctly yq -p json . input.json

# Update file in place
succinctly yq -i '.version = "2.0"' config.yaml

# NUL-separated output (for xargs -0)
succinctly yq -0 '.items[]' list.yaml | xargs -0 process

# Multiple files
succinctly yq '.version' config1.yaml config2.yaml

# Pipe from stdin
cat data.yaml | succinctly yq '.items[]'

# Multi-document YAML
succinctly yq '.' multi-doc.yaml
```

### Differences from jq

The `yq` subcommand uses yq-compatible flags (mikefarah/yq v4):

| Feature | jq | yq (succinctly yq) |
|---------|----|--------------------|
| Compact output | `-c` | `-I 0` |
| Raw output | `-r` | `-r` (--unwrapScalar) |
| Default output | JSON | YAML |
| Input format | JSON only | Auto-detect (YAML/JSON) |
| Inplace edit | N/A | `-i` |
| NUL separator | N/A | `-0` |

---

## jq Command

Query JSON files using a jq-compatible interface.

```bash
succinctly jq [OPTIONS] <FILTER> [FILES...]
```

### Basic Usage

```bash
# Identity filter (pretty-print)
succinctly jq . input.json

# Field access
succinctly jq '.name' input.json

# Array indexing
succinctly jq '.[0]' input.json
succinctly jq '.users[0].name' input.json

# Iterate all elements
succinctly jq '.[]' input.json
succinctly jq '.users[]' input.json
```

### Output Options

- `-c, --compact-output`: Compact output (no pretty printing)
- `-r, --raw-output`: Output raw strings without quotes
- `-j, --join-output`: Like -r but no newline after each output
- `-S, --sort-keys`: Sort keys of each object on output
- `-C, --color-output`: Colorize output
- `-M, --monochrome-output`: Disable colorized output
- `--tab`: Use tabs for indentation
- `--indent <N>`: Use N spaces for indentation (max 7)

### Output Formatting

By default, succinctly formats output exactly like jq does:
- **Scientific notation**: `4e4` → `4E+4`, `12e2` → `1.2E+3`, `1e-3` → `0.001`
- **Trailing zeros**: preserved (`0.10` → `0.10`)
- **Escape sequences**: `\b` and `\f` output as escape sequences (not `\u0008`)

To preserve the original formatting from the input (e.g., keep `4e4` as `4e4`):

```bash
# Using flag
succinctly jq --preserve-input . input.json

# Using environment variable
SUCCINCTLY_PRESERVE_INPUT=1 succinctly jq . input.json
```

### Input Options

- `-n, --null-input`: Don't read any input; use null as the single input value
- `-R, --raw-input`: Read each line as a string instead of JSON
- `-s, --slurp`: Read all inputs into an array
- `--input-dsv <DELIMITER>`: Read input as DSV (delimiter-separated values); each row becomes a JSON array of strings

### Variables

- `--arg NAME VALUE`: Set $NAME to the string VALUE
- `--argjson NAME VALUE`: Set $NAME to the JSON VALUE
- `--slurpfile NAME FILE`: Set $NAME to an array of JSON values from FILE
- `--rawfile NAME FILE`: Set $NAME to the string contents of FILE

### Examples

```bash
# Compact output
succinctly jq -c '.users[]' data.json

# Raw string output
succinctly jq -r '.name' user.json

# Sort keys for diff-friendly output
succinctly jq -S . config.json

# Multiple files
succinctly jq '.version' package1.json package2.json

# Pipe from stdin
cat data.json | succinctly jq '.items[]'

# Output matches jq by default
succinctly jq . input.json | diff - <(jq . input.json)
```

### Assignment Operators

The jq command supports assignment operators for modifying JSON in-place:

```bash
# Simple assignment
echo '{"a": 1}' | succinctly jq '.a = 42'
# Output: {"a": 42}

# Update assignment (applies filter to current value)
echo '{"x": 5}' | succinctly jq '.x |= . * 2'
# Output: {"x": 10}

# Compound assignment (+=, -=, *=, /=, %=)
echo '{"count": 10}' | succinctly jq '.count += 5'
# Output: {"count": 15}

echo '{"value": 100}' | succinctly jq '.value -= 25'
# Output: {"value": 75}

# Alternative assignment (sets only if null/false)
echo '{"a": null}' | succinctly jq '.a //= "default"'
# Output: {"a": "default"}

echo '{"a": "existing"}' | succinctly jq '.a //= "default"'
# Output: {"a": "existing"}  (unchanged)

# Delete field or array element
echo '{"a": 1, "b": 2}' | succinctly jq 'del(.a)'
# Output: {"b": 2}

echo '[1, 2, 3]' | succinctly jq 'del(.[1])'
# Output: [1, 3]

# Update all array elements
echo '[1, 2, 3]' | succinctly jq '.[] |= . * 2'
# Output: [2, 4, 6]

# Chained assignments
echo '{"x": 0, "y": 0}' | succinctly jq '.x = 10 | .y = 20'
# Output: {"x": 10, "y": 20}

# Nested assignment
echo '{"user": {"name": "Alice", "age": 30}}' | succinctly jq '.user.age += 1'
# Output: {"user": {"name": "Alice", "age": 31}}
```

| Operator | Syntax             | Description                                         |
|----------|--------------------|-----------------------------------------------------|
| `=`      | `.path = value`    | Simple assignment                                   |
| `\|=`    | `.path \|= filter` | Update assignment (apply filter to current value)   |
| `+=`     | `.path += value`   | Add to current value                                |
| `-=`     | `.path -= value`   | Subtract from current value                         |
| `*=`     | `.path *= value`   | Multiply current value                              |
| `/=`     | `.path /= value`   | Divide current value                                |
| `%=`     | `.path %= value`   | Modulo of current value                             |
| `//=`    | `.path //= value`  | Set only if current value is null or false          |
| `del()`  | `del(.path)`       | Delete field or array element                       |

## jq-locate Command

Find the jq expression for a position in a JSON file. Useful for editor integration and debugging.

```bash
succinctly jq-locate <FILE> [OPTIONS]
```

### Options

- `--offset <OFFSET>`: Byte offset in file (0-indexed)
- `--line <LINE>`: Line number (1-indexed)
- `--column <COLUMN>`: Column number (1-indexed, byte offset within line)
- `--format <FORMAT>`: Output format: `expression` (default) or `json`

### Examples

```bash
# Find expression by byte offset
succinctly jq-locate input.json --offset 42
# Output: .users[0].name

# Find expression by line/column
succinctly jq-locate input.json --line 5 --column 10
# Output: .config.version

# Detailed JSON output
succinctly jq-locate input.json --offset 42 --format json
# Output: {"expression":".users[0].name","type":"string","start":38,"end":52}
```

---

## yq-locate Command

Find the yq expression for a position in a YAML file. Useful for editor integration and debugging.

```bash
succinctly yq-locate <FILE> [OPTIONS]
```

### Options

- `--offset <OFFSET>`: Byte offset in file (0-indexed)
- `--line <LINE>`: Line number (1-indexed)
- `--column <COLUMN>`: Column number (1-indexed, byte offset within line)
- `--format <FORMAT>`: Output format: `expression` (default) or `json`

### Examples

```bash
# Find expression by byte offset
succinctly yq-locate config.yaml --offset 42
# Output: .users[0].name

# Find expression by line/column
succinctly yq-locate config.yaml --line 5 --column 10
# Output: .spec.containers[0]

# Detailed JSON output
succinctly yq-locate config.yaml --offset 42 --format json
# Output: {"expression":".users[0].name","type":"string","start":38,"end":52}
```

---

## Development

Run tests for the CLI:

```bash
cargo test --features cli --bin succinctly
```

Build in debug mode:

```bash
cargo build --features cli
./target/debug/succinctly json generate 1kb
```
