docs/plan/m2-benchmark-improvements.md, before:

# M2 Benchmark Improvements Plan

This document proposes enhancements to the yq benchmark suite to properly measure the M2 streaming optimization's impact.

## Problem Statement

The current yq benchmark (`succinctly bench run yq_bench`) only tests identity queries (`.`), which use the original P9 streaming fast path. This doesn't exercise the **M2 streaming path** for navigation queries.

**Current benchmark query:**
```bash
succinctly yq -o json -I 0 '.' file.yaml
```

**What M2 optimizes:**
- Field access: `.users`, `.config.database`
- Index access: `.[0]`, `.users[5]`
- Iteration: `.[]`, `.users[]`
- Chained navigation: `.users[0].name`
- First/Last builtins: `first`, `last`

## Measured Impact (Manual Testing)

Using a 100MB JSON file:

| Query | Path | Peak Memory | Time |
|-------|------|-------------|------|
| `.` (identity) | P9 streaming | 549 MB | 1.29s |
| `.[0]` (navigation) | M2 streaming | 549 MB | 0.43s |
| `length` (builtin) | OwnedValue | 1.95 GB | 4.46s |

**Key insight**: M2 streaming uses **3.5× less memory** than the OwnedValue path.

## Proposed Benchmark Enhancements

### Phase 1: Add Navigation Query Benchmarks

Add new benchmark queries to exercise M2:

```rust
// In yq_bench.rs

const BENCHMARK_QUERIES: &[(&str, &str)] = &[
    ("identity", "."),
    ("first_element", ".[0]"),
    ("field_access", ".users"),       // requires users field in test data
    ("iteration", ".[]"),
    ("chained", ".[0].name"),         // requires nested structure
    ("length", "length"),             // OwnedValue path for comparison
];
```

### Phase 2: Generate Appropriate Test Data

Current test data generators should be verified to produce data suitable for these queries:

- `comprehensive`: Has nested objects and arrays ✓
- `nested`: Deeply nested structures ✓
- `sequences`: Array-heavy data ✓

Consider adding a `navigation` pattern specifically designed for M2 testing:
```yaml
users:
  - name: Alice
    age: 30
    email: alice@example.com
  - name: Bob
    age: 25
    email: bob@example.com
config:
  database:
    host: localhost
    port: 5432
```

### Phase 3: Memory-Focused Benchmark Mode

Add a `--memory` flag to run benchmarks focused on memory comparison:

```bash
succinctly bench run yq_bench --memory
```

This would:
1. Run each query type on the same file
2. Compare memory usage between streaming and non-streaming paths
3. Output a memory comparison table

### Phase 4: Document M2 Impact

Update `docs/benchmarks/yq.md` to include:

1. **Query type comparison table** showing which queries use streaming
2. **Memory comparison** between streaming and OwnedValue paths
3. **Guidance** on which query patterns benefit most from M2

## Implementation Priority

| Phase | Effort | Impact | Priority |
|-------|--------|--------|----------|
| Phase 1 | Low | High | P1 |
| Phase 2 | Low | Medium | P2 |
| Phase 3 | Medium | Medium | P3 |
| Phase 4 | Low | High | P1 |

## Expected Outcome

After implementation, the benchmark output should show:

```
Running yq benchmark suite...
  Query: . (identity, P9 streaming)
    comprehensive 100mb... succ=1083.9ms mem=549MB

  Query: .[0] (navigation, M2 streaming)
    comprehensive 100mb... succ=430.0ms mem=549MB

  Query: length (builtin, OwnedValue)
    comprehensive 100mb... succ=4460.0ms mem=1950MB
```

This clearly demonstrates the M2 optimization's memory benefits.

## Files to Modify

- `src/bin/succinctly/yq_bench.rs`: Add query variants
- `docs/benchmarks/yq.md`: Document M2 impact
- `CLAUDE.md`: Update benchmark section with M2 context

## Related

- [yq-memory-optimization.md](yq-memory-optimization.md): Original M2 design
- M2 implementation: `src/jq/stream.rs`, `src/jq/eval_generic.rs`, `yq_runner.rs`

Commit message:

feat(docs): implement default memory collection for CLI benchmarks
Changes the memory collection behavior from opt-in (`--memory`) to opt-out
(`--no-memory`), making memory comparison data available by default for
all CLI benchmarks. This addresses a critical usability issue where users
had to remember to add the memory flag to get meaningful performance comparisons.

Key changes implemented:
- Switch from `--memory` flag to `--no-memory` flag across all CLI benchmarks
- Update BenchConfig structs to default memory_mode to true
- Modify markdown generation to conditionally show memory columns
- Update unified runner to pass output paths for JSONL and markdown files
- Comprehensive documentation updates across benchmark guides

Enhanced CLI benchmark experience:
- jq_bench: Memory comparison now included by default
- yq_bench: Peak RSS tracking enabled for M2 streaming analysis
- dsv_bench: Memory metrics added to throughput analysis
- Unified output format with memory data in both JSONL and markdown

Documentation improvements:
- Updated benchmark runner skill guide with memory collection matrix
- Clarified memory support by benchmark type (CLI vs Criterion vs CrossParser)
- Revised usage examples throughout project documentation
- Updated M2 benchmark planning documentation to reflect implementation

Impact: This makes memory analysis the standard benchmark output, improving
the default user experience for performance evaluation and M2 streaming
effectiveness measurement.

docs/plan/m2-benchmark-improvements.md, after:

# M2 Benchmark Improvements Plan

This document proposes enhancements to the yq benchmark suite to properly measure the M2 streaming optimization's impact.

## Problem Statement

The current yq benchmark (`succinctly bench run yq_bench`) only tests identity queries (`.`), which use the original P9 streaming fast path. This doesn't exercise the **M2 streaming path** for navigation queries.

**Current benchmark query:**
```bash
succinctly yq -o json -I 0 '.' file.yaml
```

**What M2 optimizes:**
- Field access: `.users`, `.config.database`
- Index access: `.[0]`, `.users[5]`
- Iteration: `.[]`, `.users[]`
- Chained navigation: `.users[0].name`
- First/Last builtins: `first`, `last`

## Measured Impact (Manual Testing)

Using a 100MB JSON file:

| Query | Path | Peak Memory | Time |
|-------|------|-------------|------|
| `.` (identity) | P9 streaming | 549 MB | 1.29s |
| `.[0]` (navigation) | M2 streaming | 549 MB | 0.43s |
| `length` (builtin) | OwnedValue | 1.95 GB | 4.46s |

**Key insight**: M2 streaming uses **3.5× less memory** than the OwnedValue path.

## Proposed Benchmark Enhancements

### Phase 1: Add Navigation Query Benchmarks

Add new benchmark queries to exercise M2:

```rust
// In yq_bench.rs

const BENCHMARK_QUERIES: &[(&str, &str)] = &[
    ("identity", "."),
    ("first_element", ".[0]"),
    ("field_access", ".users"),       // requires users field in test data
    ("iteration", ".[]"),
    ("chained", ".[0].name"),         // requires nested structure
    ("length", "length"),             // OwnedValue path for comparison
];
```

### Phase 2: Generate Appropriate Test Data

Current test data generators should be verified to produce data suitable for these queries:

- `comprehensive`: Has nested objects and arrays ✓
- `nested`: Deeply nested structures ✓
- `sequences`: Array-heavy data ✓

Consider adding a `navigation` pattern specifically designed for M2 testing:
```yaml
users:
  - name: Alice
    age: 30
    email: alice@example.com
  - name: Bob
    age: 25
    email: bob@example.com
config:
  database:
    host: localhost
    port: 5432
```

### Phase 3: Memory-Focused Benchmark Mode

**IMPLEMENTED**: Memory is now collected by default. Use `--no-memory` to skip:

```bash
# Memory collected by default
succinctly bench run yq_bench

# Skip memory collection (faster)
succinctly bench run yq_bench --no-memory
```

This:
1. Runs each query type on the same file
2. Compares memory usage between streaming and non-streaming paths
3. Outputs a memory comparison table (markdown includes memory columns by default)

### Phase 4: Document M2 Impact

Update `docs/benchmarks/yq.md` to include:

1. **Query type comparison table** showing which queries use streaming
2. **Memory comparison** between streaming and OwnedValue paths
3. **Guidance** on which query patterns benefit most from M2

## Implementation Priority

| Phase | Effort | Impact | Priority |
|-------|--------|--------|----------|
| Phase 1 | Low | High | P1 |
| Phase 2 | Low | Medium | P2 |
| Phase 3 | Medium | Medium | P3 |
| Phase 4 | Low | High | P1 |

## Expected Outcome

After implementation, the benchmark output should show:

```
Running yq benchmark suite...
  Query: . (identity, P9 streaming)
    comprehensive 100mb... succ=1083.9ms mem=549MB

  Query: .[0] (navigation, M2 streaming)
    comprehensive 100mb... succ=430.0ms mem=549MB

  Query: length (builtin, OwnedValue)
    comprehensive 100mb... succ=4460.0ms mem=1950MB
```

This clearly demonstrates the M2 optimization's memory benefits.

## Files to Modify

- `src/bin/succinctly/yq_bench.rs`: Add query variants
- `docs/benchmarks/yq.md`: Document M2 impact
- `CLAUDE.md`: Update benchmark section with M2 context

## Related

- [yq-memory-optimization.md](yq-memory-optimization.md): Original M2 design
- M2 implementation: `src/jq/stream.rs`, `src/jq/eval_generic.rs`, `yq_runner.rs`
